rock on all right hello welcome to the
panel so I think it's important to sit
down and really establish what the
agenda is gonna be we're gonna make it
really easy it's two minutes of context
28 minutes of insight so sound right
it's great it sounds perfect okay so
here's the here's the context over the
last couple of years I've been working
with a variety of different founders and
startups and smaller companies after
moving from large enterprise and I
started to see certain things with
founders now if you're a marketer you've
got a swimlane in your company if you're
a CEO oh you're a CFO you've got your
swimlane you've got your area of
expertise the thing that you bring but
if you're a founder you don't have a
swimlane you've got everybody swimlane
and even as you build and grow your
company you're still responsible for all
of those different swimlanes within your
organization and so the founder has to
be this sort of proverbial Swiss Army
knife they have to be all things to all
people they're negotiating a lease
they're getting office furniture they're
hiring new people they're talking to
customers they're engaged at events
they're getting funding they're
everything for everybody and nobody is
that good nobody has all of those skill
sets and so when we sat down over the
course of the last year I started to
realize that there's a book in here
someplace
and so for the last year interviewing 70
founders entrepreneurs investors
advisors the people in the entire
ecosystem to talk about what's it like
to be a founder and we started to see
certain themes emerge and then when I
sat down with Katie and Elena
we started to see that those themes
emerge across a variety of different
companies that its resonant that it is
in just about every organization that
founders have the symp
same similar five or six things that
they're always struggling with and so
now on to the insights portion of our
presentation that's we're gonna talk
about today are we ready to go yep
okay how about quick introductions Katie
do you want to tell us who you are what
you do why you're here yep my name is
Katie Srinivasan I run the global
digital marketing team at Dropbox so
essentially we look at how we can
acquire users engage them nurture them
upsell them throughout the journey at
Dropbox
my my journey has been a little
interesting I wasn't a software engineer
way back when and then kind of find my
found my way into marketing and so over
the last few years I have had a kind of
a bird's-eye view of both startups and
big companies on how marketing is
evolving and how if done well marketing
can be a powerhouse of growth and
revenue so that's what I'm here to talk
about perfect love it Elena my name is
Elena Verna I work from Malwarebytes
which is a cyber security company on
endpoint solution
I run product design and marketing for a
consumer product for malwarebytes my
journey really started in analytics I
was a data analyst at Survey Monkey
that's where I started my career and I
went into product marketing I went into
product then I went into performance
marketing then I wanted to growth so to
me a lot of it is a blend between
product marketing and analytics and to
way to drive our position and to drive
growth it's it's a fantastic question to
ask nowadays because the lines are
blurred more than ever before so that's
why I'm here
perfect love it okay so before we begin
quick note to the tech team the timer
has not started and if you don't start
the timer we will talk forever so a
grateful crowd sighs all right perfect
so let's let's start with the first one
the big question we hear all the time
when do I hire marketing when do I bring
marketing into the organization right so
let's let's drop this bomb right off the
bat big one big topic we can discuss
lots of different avenues we can take
off of this but either one of you when
do you bring marketing in yeah I can go
I can go first if you want so I advise a
lot of startups and typically what I say
is if you have product market fit that's
the time that you start thinking
seriously about marketing because that's
the time when you start thinking about
how can I actually scale up now that I
know that my product has stickiness it
has engagement it's not bleeding users
and now I can start going after a bigger
term the the and and it's not just about
the timing of when to bring marketing in
or going to start scaling of marketing
it's also what are the first things
first capabilities within marketing that
you want to bring in you don't I
typically say you don't
start with brand because it's not
something that you want to start
defining right off the bat what you want
to start doing is more about growth
marketing so think about what is your
funnel what how do you optimize the
funnel how what kind of people can you
bring in to help drive that kind of
optimization help grow that and then you
can start adding on all of these other
pieces of marketing that then just makes
it more of an accelerant to the products
that you have yeah I what are you trying
to solve with marketing usually
companies they come in and they say okay
marketing
I need marketing because I need to drive
acquisition to the top of my funnel and
therefore I need marketing team and
that's a slippery slope to go after
because marketing means budget marketing
means you need to have a lot of systems
a lot of people that are actually gonna
drive this traffic to your site but then
you need to convert that you need to
activate that you need to engage you
need to retain I would actually go one
step further and say what is it how's
your can your product acquire customers
do you need a marketing team a lot of
push nowadays are coming into product
lead growth
what does product lead growth it's the
product that actually drives virality
and drives acquisition into the product
so think about slack you cannot join
slack and use it by yourself you need
other people to join in slack in order
for you to make that product work you
create the viral loop out of that one
user that you've acquired that one user
will drive additional users into the
product Malwarebytes for example we have
our target persona that refers our
product to everybody else that has
issues with their devices you have an
issue device oh just run malwarebytes
they act as our marketing agent so can
you get your users to actually act as
your marketing agents because that's an
organic viral way and a stable way to
organic way to really acquire your
customers now once you establish that
you can have a product lead growth then
start a marketing team but be aware that
once you start the marketing team you're
going into the journey of a much larger
budget much more accountability for the
spend a much lower profit margins for
you to actually spend on the product
development and research so I think it's
it's dangerous to start a marketing team
way too early because you take the focus
off product and you take the you take
the really responsibility off product to
drive your growth make your product work
for you first before you go into the
marketing endeavors especially with
branding teams which are so loosely
measured in terms of how do you actually
spend your money which is very valuable
spend but at certain stage of the
company once you've applied growth once
you're on board and your performance
marketing then you can go into brand
yeah I think the the thing that I heard
the big takeaway here was it's really
what's the problem you're solving right
it's flipping the question on its head
because what most people are doing is
well when should I bring in marketing
and so they go outside they start
talking to mentors and advisers when do
I bring marketing in and they hear their
stories but what they really need to do
is start asking themselves that question
what is the problem that I'm trying to
solve right problem people solve they
want more money they want their company
to make more money because they have
investors and they need to pay off those
investors so if you need more money you
need to look at all of your metrics and
say is it actually acquisition that I'm
struggling with maybe its activation
maybe its retention your marketing team
may or may not help you with that so you
need to be just understand where you
growth and where most of your drop-off
actually going on yeah I would also add
if you think about the the again kind of
dissecting that problem it could even
within the let's take the manager right
it even within that there are so many
different flavors of that problem are
you trying to drive the demand Jen by
increasing the top of the funnel are you
trying to drive demand Jen because you
want that end conversion to revenue what
what specific part of that whole stack
are you looking to solve what problem
are you looking to solve the other thing
to keep in mind too is not all heads of
marketing are similar everybody comes
with a different background a different
skill set and it's very rare that you
would find a unicorn that's really good
at brand and product marketing and
performance marketing and growth and
kind of that comes in one package so you
need to be really thoughtful as a
founder or a CEO or even executive board
executive member to say what is the
first edge of marketing you want what is
kind of the first thrust and hire for
that and then you start layering on okay
what is the next problem that marketing
can solve what's the third marketing
problem come on
it's all and then kind of build your
team that way well in the thing I think
is really interesting is there there
really are those sort of three main
buckets for marketing right you've got
your product marketer you've got your
brand marketer right and then you've got
your growth marketer yeah and you're not
going to find all three in any one
person maybe there's three people on the
planet that can do all three of those
really well right and they've already
been hired by Ford and coca-cola right
so you're not going to find those people
maybe you find someone that's got two
but more likely you're gonna find that
person that's got one and so what's the
problem you're solving at that
particular time and using that as the
lever to go bring in that kind of market
yeah you will never find people who are
those or I shouldn't say that you're
it's very rare to find your cons but
what you're looking for is people who
who have the in-depth expertise in one
or two of those areas but know what to
hire for in the area that they don't
have skill sets in and you also want to
look for people who are who know when to
turn on certain levels again going back
to what Elena was saying around brand
you don't want to turn on a brand
investment when you are a small product
when you are just bear you know finding
your product market fit that's just
gonna burn a bunch of money and nobody
is going to be happy so you need to you
need to find people who know when to
turn things on and when to start
addressing strategic levels for growth
and that should be part of a portfolio
of skills that you look for as a
marketer nice and you don't necessarily
need a cohesive marketing team either
there's so many companies out there
they're now breaking it out product
marketing sense with product brand and
creatives
together Performance Marketing as
marketed as growth marketing and this is
with growth team so I think it's you do
what's right for your organization so
there's no like this big elephant in the
room I'm starting a marketing team just
do what's right yet you get yourself at
the expertise that you need get people
that I just want you to get things done
and position them in the best and the
best way organizationally for them to
succeed then once you big enough you can
start your cohesive marketing team but
there's fewer and fewer companies that
actually have that and there's a reason
for that because it's impossible to find
that one leader that will be really
really good at both areas yeah it's an
interesting point it was one of the
conversations from the book last year
talked to one person who did a lot with
Tiger teams early on and
of hiring a big entire marketing
organization they would hire one
marketer and then they would find a good
product person they would find someone
and had some savvy around the brand they
would find someone from sales put
together a team and go technical solve
one particular problem and do it in a
really smart way and then rinse and
repeat and that kept them from having to
build a team of 10 or 15 marketers and
use those resources to become more fit
more scalable and drive their business
yeah I think that's a great that's a
great observation I think this also
starts the question of how do you
organize your marketing team you could
organize it by functional silos like
product marketing brand marketing growth
but what you're talking about is there
are some forward-thinking CMOS who've
actually organized their teams around
the specific areas of the customer
journey so they have teams that are just
focused on onboarding teams that are
focused on first-time user experience
teams that are focused on retention and
so that's those teams are truly
cross-functional because they pull in
people from all of the different
disciplines and force them to work on a
problem together and so it you're
essentially really focused on customer
experience when you do that and then
you're you're making sure that somebody
is responsible for the all the different
use cases of how users come in and how
they stick to your product yeah so
basing them around metrics as opposed to
the functional area so your job is not
to drive traffic your job is to drive
activations for example what it means to
achieve activation is to get the traffic
through the signup flow through
onboarding to your aha moments and the
product that's a much more that's better
problem to solve for your business
because it will be linked to the outcome
of an engaged user that then you can
move into conversion so then you have a
team that can be focusing on paid
conversion or something along those
lines but usually goes into activation
conversion retention and those are the
three tiger teams that you form that are
throughout the throughout the process
and each one of those will specifically
be linked to the outcome metric that
you're driving which is total bookings
but then you have the actual KPIs that
the team's are thinking and breathing
about as opposed to saying okay let me
bring more traffic to my site guess what
that can be a vanity metric they can
literally mean absolutely nothing
depending on the type of traffic that
comes in
yep well and I think that what's really
interesting about what we're talking
about is it's it's breaking down the
traditional hierarchy of CMO and then
the teams below them right this
traditional org chart and what you're
looking at what we've been talking about
is finding ways to go tackle the
specific problem they're addressing and
building the teams and structures around
that and tying them to outcomes
deliverables measurements right instead
of just throwing it over the wall and
saying well the marketing organization
will solve that and I think that's where
some of the the disconnection has come
in with founders and marketers is
because they don't understand the
structure and who's going to be
responsible for those pieces and so it
never feels like there's somebody that
actually owns that one problem yep I
think it also goes back to the metrics
question if you're not able to clearly
define what marketing can own a single
metric then you're likely not doing it
right you're likely not defining what
problem needs to be solved right you be
marketing you can as a founder you can't
be in a position where where you let
different groups influence metrics you
need to have you need to enforce
accountability in terms of what is the
one metric you this organization can
drive that is solely under your control
which then probably leads to revenue or
some kind of growth metric but what is
that one thing that we can all align on
and then use that as a forcing function
to say this is the problem you want to
solve right in in subscription
businesses for instance an example of
that would be how many signups how many
subscriptions you want to generate yeah
easy metric marketing can be completely
gold towards that it contributes to
revenue it's a very easy to understand
problem to be solved so kind of comes
back to what I wanted you not start
what's the Northstar KPI that you want
to help drive and that should be
processed driven but outcome driven
because if you give them a metric you're
driving towards a successful outcome for
the company as opposed to a process I
have done my task and therefore it's
time for me to move on as opposed to I
have done my task I need to achieve an
outcome and then I can move on yeah well
and I think the thing that makes this
really interesting is the the founder
the business leader the CEO can actually
become part of the equation they can sit
down with the marketer or marketing
team or whatever the structure is that
they've got in place and say look you're
responsible for this thing right here's
the outcome I expect and here's what I
want to get reported on and so it
doesn't become this big black box it's
something that they can help and work on
and partner on and this creates a
relationship between the marketer and
the founder the CEO that I think it's
been a struggle in most organizations
yeah because founders a CEO did the
checklist you need I need this in order
to succeed I need this team
I need this process I need to spend
money on ads I need to do search engine
optimization as opposed to give them a
metric to solve let the to figure out
how they actually gonna solve it and
what they need to do yeah I I have found
exactly that too is a lot of founders
come to marketers and say run this thing
for me run Fedewa AdWords so drun this
XYZ so it's like a patient coming to a
doctor saying give me cough medicine
because I have cough versus letting the
doctor diagnose what you have right yeah
so as a founder you need to be able to
give the market the head of marketing a
chance to sit at this at the table and
help you formulate strategy for the
company and then be able to say as an
equal partner okay the company wants to
grow by 15% or hopefully not 15 but 50%
by the end of the year marketing can
contribute 30 percentage points of that
and here's how we're going to do it so
kind of work backwards from what the
outcome should be like Elena was talking
about but let the market or come up with
a strategy versus dictating what it
should be well and I think this comes
back to what we were saying before
identify the problem right bring in
teams and people to help you do that
partner with the organization to do that
but then also allow the subject matter
experts to come in and give way in and
play the role that they're supposed to
instead of just being taskmasters yeah
yep perfect okay all right so this was
one of the other ones that we talked
about and I loved the short and sweet
answer to a relatively complex problem
and one that we're hearing a lot of
today you'll hear over the next day it's
category creation right and so you have
some really great insights because this
is one of those things it's very buzzy
everybody's talking about it
category creation being king of category
as top of mind for
just about every founder let's talk
about it okay I'll start
so category creation um why why I mean
yes it's sexy to create a category
because then you or your the simple
you're inventing in a space but you
fundamental fundamental problem that
you're actually trying to solve is for
the demand that already exists out there
that there's no solution to address that
demand so before creating a category
thinking about creating a category you
might want to find a product market fit
to the problem that already exists I
figure out what category that exists
currently in find your customers get
them to the aha moment of your product
get them so they can actually retain and
your product and then you can use some
of the branding exposure to actually
drive new category creation but guess
what if you're suppose if you start on
the category creation nobody's gonna
search for that category nobody's gonna
know how to find it so find your
customers get that buzz going get that
product market fit get that compounding
growth where everybody's talking about
you and then come out and say I'm this
new category so to me it's more of a
branding play if anything but it comes
much farther down the far the further
down the line and the lifecycle of a
company versus going from the start up
and saying I'm doing this new thing that
nobody does before well then nobody will
search for it so and guess what you you
need to get some of the organic girls at
the beginning if you're really only
marketing driven company and that's the
way that you means of driving
acquisition it would be very hard for
you to scale in in accellerating fashion
right from the start yeah I agree with
Elena
so there is a great book by Seth Godin
called all marketers or storytellers and
his the big premise of that book is if
if you're a great marketer what you're
doing is tapping into a common worldview
that a huge swath of consumers have and
then you're capitalizing on that
worldview and by capitalizing we are
talking about creating a product for
them or creating a story that resonates
with that that set of users and to me
this idea of category creation is just
that
identifying a huge set of users that
have a common worldview of something of
a problem that need to be solved or a
need that needs to be met and you're
solving that problem for them either
through a product or a service or a
story or a message or a brand product a
premise or something like that and if
you do it well enough and in big numbers
and profitably you have a category
you've created a category so it's it's
as I think it's as simple and as
complicated as that is go back to the
fundamentals you want to build a great
company what do you base it on it's
based on the fact that a huge number of
people across the world want your
product for a a need that nobody else
has solved for them and start from there
and then your category is naturally
going to come just you know do if you do
it the right way well in what I love
about the answer is so category creation
is big and weighty and can weigh on look
like atlas right can weigh on shoulders
of a founders mind right they can be
really something that they struggle with
and so the way you've broken this down
and taking it down to the fundamentals
of what's the product market fit
what's the aha moment what's the thing
that you're creating for your customer
and then go in on that and use that as
the lever category creation can come
down the road but it's just like a lot
of things that we're talking about and
we'll talk about too early for some of
these activities in marketing whether
it's brand or content or you name it can
be just as detrimental as not doing it
at all
and I also think as a when you start as
a founder you have a specific idea of
what your product is and what need it is
solving for users five years down the
line that may not be the need anymore
because consumers change a lot of things
change and so it's it's really hard to
say this is the category I'm going to
create and say ten years from now it's
going to be the same category that
that's going to be relevant you what if
you are agile enough you're moving with
the changes in the consumer mentality
and the consumer responses and you're
creating something or you're you know
redefining in pivoting something and
building a category it's easy to say
people like uber has they have created a
category but that's in retrospect you
look back and we think oh my god yeah
they did create a category but I am sure
a lot of people as they're going to the
process they are not actively thinking
that's my one one thing I need to do I
need to create a category what they're
thinking is how am I going to get this
product in front of people and get them
to love it and that that's what you
should be thinking about that should be
your priority yeah what the problem
you're solving can you get your
customers to aha moment in a couple
seconds flat
after they've started engagement with
your product do they have they need to
come back and then the bigger questions
come in terms of do you have actually
are you monetizing on the value metric
for the customers so does your
engagement equivalent with monetization
then you're actually solving fundamental
problems that will really unblock your
business growth as opposed to saying
okay I'm creating category creation and
therefore my business is going to grow
so those fundamental boulders are much
more important to address from the
beginning as opposed to any really
anything else perfect okay I think we've
got we got a little more time so here
was one that we heard quite a bit was
you know from from a founder a leaders
perspective the CEO or CFO doesn't
confuse me I know what the CEO does I
have no idea what the CMO does and
marketers speak their own language and
you guys frankly confuse the hell out of
me right heard that one time and time
again and so let's let's break that down
a little bit if you're a business leader
and you're hiring that maybe it's the
first marketer or the first team or a
couple of those key people all the way
up to that CMO how do you break through
that how do you connect with the
marketer especially when you feel like I
really this is a conversation I'm not
equipped for how do you have that
conversation with a marketer and know
the right kind of marketer to bring in
at the right time and how do we educate
them to do that there's also one more
category at growth what does growth as a
product is it marketing who knows I I
think
connecting you just have to give people
that are passionate about your product
they get it they actually want to
connect customers to your product and
are engaged in it so I I almost think
about close equivalent of like product
market or is a great first hire just
because they will actually connect your
product to customers and they will think
about that journey and they're agnostic
of acquisition or conversion or
engagement funnels they're thinking
about the entire customer journey so
think about more of generalist I think
at the beginning that can really contact
switch and help you with whichever
problems that you're solving with as
opposed to getting specific specialists
that will focus on one specific vertical
of driving some certain activities in
your marketing funnel and then you just
grow it organically so it's it's it's a
need base but getting generalists at the
beginning from my perspective is you the
bigger bang for your buck that you're
gonna spend on the person actually
getting you that to the outcomes that
you want yeah I would agree I think you
again I think it comes back to some of
the original things that we were
discussing around what is the problem
you want to solve but I think you need
to have somebody who can help you think
through what the company strategy is
going to be right at the beginning you
you as a founder you're dealing with
many different things one of them being
what should be by my business model how
should I do this this kind of pricing
what what is the impact that's going to
that's going to have on users and how do
we bring users into the funnel so you
want somebody who can help you think
through those kind of decisions and so
there needs to be a certain level of
altitude and seniority for that person
like Elena was saying at the same time I
would also balance it with you need to
have someone you need to have a person
or a few people in there who can be
extremely scrappy they need to be growth
marketers they need to be experimenting
they need to have the DNA of constant
testing and iteration and so you you
know you can't create strategy in a
vacuum you need to have the underlying
data and assumptions to prove that and
so you need to have that balance of
somebody who's senior enough to
understand how to help drive strategy
based on what's happening and then an
execution person who can help put out
those experiments get those learnings
and move fast so I would I would kind of
look at a set of people like that who
you can bring in and
and assign them a problem a metric and
say go get this done well and there's
the the off quoted statistic of you know
average tenure of a CMO is like eighteen
months right and part of that problem is
because you bring in people that don't
fit the company the company's place
aren't passionate about the product or
service that you're offering and so you
go find somebody and you're like I want
this footprint I want somebody who did
this at one of my competitors or I want
somebody who did this at a really
storied brand not realizing that they
may be four or five steps ahead of you
and where you are in your product
lifecycle they may have a team of 20
people working for them and then they
come into your organization and they're
a team of one you spent all your money
on this one person and then you're
asking them to roll up their sleeves and
do things that they're ill-equipped to
do yeah and that kind of boggles my mind
this idea of best practice so because if
you are trying to hire somebody somebody
who has done this before what innovation
are you actually expecting out of them
right yeah because they're going to
follow up they're going to come in and
do what your competition who is likely
four times bigger than you is doing and
so where is your level of scrappiness
and innovation and entrepreneurship that
you want so it's it's I don't think that
you should always index on going after
experience you should look at is this
person does this person have the
problem-solving ability do they have
that ability to think critically and be
creative about solving a completely new
problem that we are trying to solve and
how do we bring more innovation to that
the hiring CMO is an organizational
consolidation do you really need that at
that moment in time and that's a pretty
expensive move as well you're paying
over $200,000 to somebody doing what
managing it's you you just need to be
careful where your money is actually
going well and I just noticed our our
title is called playbook for building a
marketing dream team and you just said
screw the playbook so I think we're
going to have to have to rethink qualify
that though what I'm saying is that you
don't want somebody who has done a thing
before many many times you want them to
come in and build a playbook for you
right in your company because you're
unique and you have a different you want
to do things differently you don't want
to go against the same competition beat
your head
on the same door and tried to do the
same things it doesn't work well looking
at the thing that I heard that I can
distill back it that we sort of repeated
time and time again is it's it's no the
problem you're solving yeah right that's
the first one know that you've got
really good product market fit because
from that all things will flow right
it's having people come in that are
really excited that enthusiasm goes a
long way they still need a skill set
right you're not just hiring somebody
and off the street that's sort of like
bubbly right but you need some of those
skill sets you want that enthusiasm for
the product and service and for you as a
founder and as a leader and then you
need to work with them so that they can
enable the process that you're looking
to build and then also not rely on the
prior successes of somebody else that
that they've got a great resume and
they've got a great background but do
you want somebody that's just gonna come
in and bring the template and try and
make that fit in your organization your
golden snowflake you're unique right and
so do you want something that's going to
come in and just do that time and time
again and the answer is likely no but
marketing is one of the only
organizations that are truly going
through the very big shift nowadays you
still have your product orgs you still
have your engineering orgs you finance
your accounting but marketing is what
really starting to break down in a lot
of organizations because they want to
have marketing be more effective and be
more submerged with the rest of the for
the rest of the teams and therefore
there's no such thing as consolidated
marking team like I think in a lot of
other organizations and they're moving
away from that so it's a it's a living
breathing animal of whether you actually
need it or not but I think starting with
actually decentralized teams is a lot
more effective at the beginning compared
to starting trying to bring this team
that can be very disconnected from
everything you're doing on the product
and engineering front perfect well we're
just about out of time the one thing I
wanted to add is something that we
talked about in prep one of the reasons
both of you do this is because you truly
thoroughly enjoy the conversations that
happen in the hallways with attendees
afterwards so I would encourage
everybody to reach out to caddy reach
out to Elena reach out to me we're gonna
be around for the rest of the afternoon
but I think we're out of time so thank
you all for being a kind attentive
audience and have a great rest of the
show